Well, we are going to be continuing this morning with our study in the book of Ephesians.
But I will tell you that you may have thought that we are going to be talking about Ephesians chapter 1, starting at verse 15, down to the end of the chapter.
Last week we finished what is the longest sentence
in the New Testament.
It goes from Ephesians chapter one verse three all the way down through verse 14, 202 words in the original Greek.
And we should have gone right on to verse 15 this week, but we're not going to because I wanna save it for Easter.
So I'm gonna save it for Easter and we're gonna jump to Ephesians chapter two.
And we're actually going to think a bit about the entire chapter of Ephesians chapter two.
and you're all thinking, we're never gonna get out of here.
That's not true, we will, okay, trust me.
But what I wanna do this morning, I'm gonna hit some parts of it rather quickly, but you realize that when Paul wrote this letter, this was his sermon, right?
This got read aloud to the congregation, and not everyone had their own copy of it, it was read aloud to them so they sat, they listened to what Paul had written.
And so what I'd like to do this morning is start off by having you just listen to Ephesians chapter two.
the words that Paul wanted to speak to that ancient church there in Ephesus and just listen to what those words are.
And so Justin and Bergen Boatwright are going to come up and they're going to read this chapter fours.
You can listen.
I'll put it on screen too so you can read as well, okay?
And you were dead in the trespasses and sins in which you once walked following the course of this world, following the prince of the power of the air,
the spirit that is now at work in the sons of disobedience, among whom we all once lived in the passions of our flesh, carrying out the desires of the body and mind, and were by nature children of wrath like the rest of mankind.
But God, being rich in mercy, because of the great love with which he loved us, even when we were dead in our trespasses,
made us alive together with Christ.
By grace you have been saved and raised us up with him and seated us with him in the heavenly places in Christ Jesus so that in the coming ages he might show the immeasurable riches of his grace and kindness toward us in Christ Jesus.
For by grace you have been saved through faith.
And this is not your own doing.
It is the gift of God.
not the result of works so that no one may boast.
We are his workmanship created in Christ Jesus for good works, which God prepared beforehand that we should walk in them.
Therefore, remember that at one time you Gentiles in the flesh called the uncircumcision by what is called the circumcision, which is made in the flesh by hands.
Remember that you were at the time separated from Christ
alienated from the commonwealth of Israel and strangers to the covenants of promise, having no hope and without God in the world.
But now in Christ Jesus, you who once were far off have been brought near by the blood of Christ.
For he himself is our peace, who has made us both one and has broken down in his flesh the dividing wall of hostility by abolishing the law of commandments expressed in the ordinances.
that he might create in himself one new man in place of two.
So making peace and might reconcile us both to God in one body through the cross, thereby killing the hostility.
And he came and preached peace to you who were far off and peace to those who were near.
For through him, we both have access in one spirit to the Father.
So then you are no longer strangers and aliens, but you are fellow citizens with the saints and members of the household of God, built on the foundation of the apostles and prophets, Christ Jesus himself being the cornerstone in whom the whole structure being joined together grows into a holy temple in the Lord.
In him, you also are being built together into a dwelling place for God by the Spirit.
You know, when our kids were growing up, I came up with this idea that I called dates with dad.
Because I was a pretty busy guy, running a business and all, I'm pretty project-oriented, I realized that if I just kind of waited for the opportunity to sort of present itself organically, there was a chance that I would miss out on some of the time that I really wanted to spend with my kids.
So for me, this was a way of being intentional about saying, this is important to me.
So what dates with dad was, was that every Christmas, I would give the kids a gift.
And the gift, I tried to do it different every year, but it would tell them some dates that each one of them was going to have, one on one with me, every month, which meant I had to think, OK, what's it going to be?
One year it was a little calendar with pop open windows that told you each month what it was going to be.
One year it was coupons.
One year I gave them cards with GPS coordinates if they figured it out, they knew where we were going.
So all different ways of trying to give them these dates with dad.
And then it might be something big.
Maybe it was going backpacking together for a weekend.
It might be something really small when they were little.
One of the things I did was I took them to the world's smallest zoo, which means we went down to the pet store.
We didn't buy anything.
We just looked at stuff for a while, right?
But hey, when you're three years old, that's big stuff.
But it was a way for me to be intentional about that.
And this is just free, but I'll say to you dads and grandfathers, if you want to make sure you're getting some of these times with your kids, make a plan.
And for me, that Christmas gift was something that forced me to say, think ahead, be intentional, make a plan.
I've never regretted that.
In fact, a few Christmases ago, my kids for Christmas all gave me dates with dad.
And that was pretty fun.
Well, one year, I got the idea.
for our three-year-old son, David, that he and I would go four-wheeling together.
And the idea was that we were going to go up just an abandoned logging road near us, and I had this Ford F-150.
It had four-wheel drive.
I didn't really plan to lock in the hubs.
We were just going to bump along in this dirt road, and he would think that that was really fun.
So that's what we did.
And so once we got up onto this logging road,
I hadn't been up it before, but they're all kinds of logging roads.
We were living in the Sears at the time.
We get onto the road, and we're away from traffic.
So I got David out of his car seat.
I let him sit on my lap.
I let him hold onto this steering wheel, so he was steering.
And then we rolled along at three miles an hour bumping over the road.
He thought that was fantastic.
And so we're going on this little logging road, and we came to a Y in the road.
And I said, hey, buddy, which way do you want to go?
You're driving, so which way do you want to go?
So when he pointed off to the left, all right, we turned to the left and off we went.
Now, there in the Sierra's, you get a lot of manzanita.
And as we're going up this road, I'm noticing that we're really hemmed in.
The road is cut through the manzanita, but there's no easy place to get off the road.
And all of a sudden, we come around this corner and the road just goes up.
I mean, it is really steep.
And I'm looking at them thinking, I don't know if we should do that.
But I was going to have to back all the way back out.
There's nowhere to turn around.
So I'm thinking, you know, I've got four-wheel drive.
This would be kind of fun.
So I put the kid back in the car seat, buckled him up, got out, locked in the hubs, and we started off.
Now, I should mention one of the things is we were climbing up this hill, and that is that the hill was pretty deeply rutted.
We were not the first truck to try climbing it.
And also there's been a lot of water runoff over the winters.
And so these big, deep ruts.
And I knew better than to let myself get in the rut.
So I straddled them right.
I got one set of wheels up on the center between them.
They went off to the side.
And we're doing great.
Four-wheeling up the hill.
David's loving it.
I'm loving it.
It's this bonding father-son moment.
And then we came to the trench.
About two-thirds of the way up.
Apparently, the Forest Service had decided they did not want people like me going up this Forest Service road, and they had dug this giant trench across the road.
So I stopped, I looked that over, knew we weren't getting through that, also knew we still had manzanita all around us, couldn't turn around, and I realized that the only way out of this little predicament was going to be backing down the hill.
Did I mention this was really steep?
This was so steep that when I got out of the truck to take a look, I immediately slipped and fell down.
That's how steep it was.
And of course, they mentioned the ruts.
Yeah, there were ruts.
So it's so steep that I can't really see the road in my rear view mirror, which means I've got to use my side mirrors and hang my head out to the side to see where I'm going, backing down this hill, making sure I don't go in the ruts.
Now, some of you can already guess where this is going to go.
I hadn't gotten too far down the hill until I felt the back end kind of shimmy to the side, and the rear wheels dropped into the ruts, which instantly high centered the rear end.
But it's okay because I've got four wheel drive.
And I'm a guy, and we can do this kind of stuff.
So all I gotta do is I've gotta put it in drive, pull forward, and I'm gonna pull the rear wheels back up out of the ruts, and we'll be good to go again.
That's what I did, which worked great until the front wheels, drug by the force of the rear wheels, slipped over, and they dropped into the ruts.
And now I was high centered, front and back.
And there we were stuck on the hillside.
So this is the Sierra's.
It's pretty hot.
So here's this day heading up into the hundreds.
Now we're stuck on this steep hillside.
There was no one around to help.
This is in the days before cell phones, so we're just out there.
I've got a now, no longer having fun, but rather worried three-year-old who can tell that maybe daddy's got us into a bad spot.
I tried everything to get that truck free.
I mean, I didn't have a shovel, but whatever I had, I tried scooping and pushing rocks under the rear wheels.
I tried rocking it.
I did manage to slide it down a little ways, but that actually only made it worse.
And finally, I just am out of options.
I don't know how else I'm going to get this thing up out of the ruts to get us out of there.
And then I had an idea.
I thought, you know, I've got a jack.
I could crawl into the truck.
I could jack it up enough to get rocks under the wheels, and I could get out of the ruts.
I actually started to get the jack out before the first major of common sense struck me.
I'm like, what kind of fool would you be on a steep hillside to crawl underneath a truck with a jack?
This thing's going to fall and crush you and leave this child up here stranded by himself in the woods.
So finally, I had to face the fact that there was no way that I could get the truck out of those ruts.
My only option was to hike out, carrying the toddler down the steep hill, walking back.
It was a mile or two to the nearest house so that I could call for help.
So I finally got there, found a house, went up, asked if we could use the phone, and my first call was to my insurance agent.
Because I had paid a little extra to have roadside assistance on my policy.
And I wanted to know if maybe that would help get me out.
And her first question to me was, how far off the road are you?
I said, well, I'm a little ways.
And in her most authoritative voice, she said,
OK, Tim, just this once.
That's all I needed.
My second call was to a tow truck company that specialized in off-road rescues.
And that guy showed up, and he had a four-wheel drive duly tow truck, right?
Dual wheels in the back, four-wheel drive.
He pulls up into that road.
Of course, he could totally straddle the ruts.
He's got dualies, so he's not sinking in.
He maneuvers around me.
He's got these spikes he drops into Anker's truck, hooks up to me, and nothing flat.
He drags me out and takes me back to the bottom.
And he told me that during the winter he made a fortune by going up there on weekends and just waiting and pulling people out.
Okay, that brings me to Ephesians chapter two, verses one through three.
Paul says that there was a time when we all were stuck.
Dead end,
stuck.
We were dead in our trespasses and sins.
And the reason we were stuck is because we had been following this deeply rutted road.
He calls it the course of this world.
It's the way the world runs, and we were caught up in it.
And he says the rut had been started by the prince of the power of the air, which is just kind of a fancy name for Satan.
And what he means by that is that Satan's influence over humanity
dominates.
His lies are the air that we breathe.
We live in a world saturated with his lies and his temptations.
And the harmful currents that flow around us are almost invisibly built into every culture, as Satan fans them for all he's worth.
But, like any deep rut, part of his power comes from all the others who have gone down the same track.
That's the power of culture.
The reason those ruts were so deep on that hillside is a lot of other people had tried going there before me, and I just kind of fell into the groove of whoever else had gone.
And Paul refers to that traffic jam of humanity as being the sons of disobedience.
He says, you were following in the same path as all these other people who were living in disobedience.
And Paul's very clear that we were right there with them.
Nothing unique about us."
And he says, the motivator behind their rush into those ruts were the passions of body and mind.
In other words, it felt good.
It was fun for a while.
Like David and me, heading up that hillside, it looked pretty exciting.
It was going to be a great day.
What could possibly go wrong?
David was too young to know better.
I had too much testosterone to think better.
And Paul says the problem with those ruts is that they lead to disaster.
Said we were by nature, by the very fact of the ruts that we were in, the path that we were on, the way like all of us, like all humanity was going, we were objects of wrath.
those passions, those desires that we so naturally fall into, he says, they may seem exciting, but ultimately they lead to harm.
Isn't that one of the great lies of sin?
If you think about the temptations that you have given into, isn't one of the things that you tell yourself is, this is okay because nobody else is going to get hurt.
Yeah, we've seen the messes other people got into.
But worst positive, that we can straddle the ruts.
We'll do it different.
We won't get caught the way they got caught.
We won't get hurt the way they get hurt.
We can go on this joy ride.
We're not going to hurt anyone else.
If you had told me the morning that David and I set out was a journey that was going to endanger the life of my son, I would have said you were crazy.
There's no way that could happen.
And yet, that's exactly what I did.
See, that's what makes evil evil.
It's not that God is against you having a good time.
It's not that God sees us having fun.
He says, we'll put a stop to that.
It's the fact that evil invariably brings harm to yourself and to others.
And God, who is
love ultimately will not let evil, which is anti-love, rule the day.
Paul says a day of judgment will come.
There will be a trench across the road.
God says it stops here.
God's wrath, he says, will be poured out.
Not because he's mad that we had fun, but because he's had it with the damage that our pride and our passion have wreaked.
You know, the story could have just stopped there.
We followed a bad path.
We fell into the ruts.
The ruts led to catastrophe, end of story.
We got what we deserved.
That's justice.
But God.
But God being rich in mercy.
was willing to do something for us that went way beyond the terms of our roadside assistance program.
He said, you are way off road here, but I'm still going to come to rescue you.
And why would he do that?
Well, it says that because of his great love with which he loved us, even when we were dead in our trespasses, we are stuck, stuck,
stuck, and it's our fault, our fault, our fault, and yet God in his love came to rescue.
In my rut, following the path of my own choosing, facing certain consequences that I rightly deserve, God still loved me.
And don't forget who's writing these words, right?
This is the apostle Paul.
This is a guy who at one time was so full of his own self-righteousness, so driven by arrogant zeal that he had hunted men, women, and children for the purpose of throwing them into prison.
In fact, he went so far as to seek to have some of them put to death simply because of their faith in Jesus.
And yet, he was a man that God had literally brought to his knees
and he had transformed him.
God had saved him out of that rut.
And then think about who it is that he's writing to here.
He's writing to Gentiles.
I will say this again before this series is over, but we cannot begin to wrap our minds around, I don't think, what it means, a guy like Paul, a highly trained
highly orthodox Jewish rabbi should end up being a pastor with a heart for Gentiles.
I mean, maybe it would be like saying that there was a southern plantation owner who suddenly turned and became a pastor to black congregations.
I mean, that is the kind of racial and religious divide there was between these groups.
And yet here is Paul.
with a passion not just for Jewish Christians, people of his own tribe, but people outside of his tribe that at one time he would have called them dogs.
And yet here he is pounding his pulp and saying they are loved by God and that both he and they are united as one together in Christ.
What an amazing change of worldview.
And it's all because Paul had come to understand the greatness of God's love
And Paul's life had become filled with God's spirit.
And here's what Paul'd want us to know.
We're loved that way as well.
God's love is that great.
And so what did he do?
Ephesians 2, 5, and 6, he made us alive together with Christ.
He raised us up.
He seated us with him in the heavenly places.
He pulled us out of the rut.
And he didn't just pull us out, he let us jump in and ride with him.
And the reason he let us ride with him is so that in the future, part of the motivation, part was to rescue us, part was he was gonna show us off.
If at any point in the future someone walks up to Jesus, walks up to Jesus' tow truck and asks him, how good are you?
All he has to do is lean back and point to us and say,
Look who's in my truck.
And they'll say, wow, that is how great your love is.
God's rescue of us from our mess is this eternal witness to his grace and kindness.
And it's all thanks to his grace.
By grace we've been saved.
It's like my experience with that beautiful four wheel drive tow truck.
The fact that I am here today says nothing about my skills as an off-road driver.
Nobody gets to heaven because they figured out how to drive up that hill.
I have nothing to boast about except a rescuer who had the power to do for me what I was powerless to do for myself.
That is the gospel.
for we are his workmanship created in Christ Jesus for good works, which God prepared beforehand that we should walk in them.
Paul wraps up by saying that God's plan in Christ Jesus was not simply to pull us out of our ruts.
He says he actually has placed us on a whole new road, not a path dictated by selfish passions.
A path that invariably caused us harm to ourselves and to others, but a path dedicated to selfless love, to good works,
In fact, he says, these are opportunities that God has already set in motion and placed before us.
God rescued you because he has a job for you to do.
Now, verses 11 through 22, I'm gonna sum them up really briefly because they deal with an issue that isn't really much of an issue for us.
It's all about this great cultural divide.
I already talked about it a bit between Jews and Gentiles.
a divide so great that no devoted Jew would even contemplate accepting a dinner invitation to a Gentile's home.
In fact, when you went into the great temple of Jerusalem, there was what was known as the court of the Gentiles.
And so Gentiles were allowed to come a little ways into the temple.
But then there was a wall.
And no Gentile was allowed past that wall.
Only Jews who go farther in
could symbolically get closer to the Holy of Holies, closer to the presence of God.
Gentiles had to stay out.
And that wall has some pretty strict warnings.
Here's a sample of one.
This was a stone that archaeologists found.
This at one time was in the temple.
And if you want to translate what that says, here it is.
No foreigner, Gentile, is to enter within the balustrade, that is the wall, and the enclosure around the sanctuary.
Whoever is caught will have himself to blame for his ensuing death."
How would you like that in the church lobby?
You know, if you're not part of our approved group, don't even think about coming farther in than the entryway or you will die.
Maybe put next to the welcome center, anyway.
The stunning thing that Paul proclaims is that in Christ,
The divide is gone.
He says, he himself is our peace, who has made us both one and has broken down in his flesh the dividing wall of hostility.
You understand how that would ring in their ears?
They knew what the temple was like in Jerusalem.
They knew where the wall was.
And Paul is saying, because we are in Christ, the wall has been broken down.
because Christ is creating one new man in place of two that he might reconcile as both to God in one body through the cross, thereby killing the hostility.
So Christ is building this new community that is not rooted in race or accomplishment or moral achievement, but it's a community rooted in grace and love.
And whatever prejudice is, we might naturally carry.
And prejudice is still around today, isn't it?
In fact, I would dare say it can creep into here, too.
Each one of us has to weigh our own hearts and say, Lord, what are those lines?
What are those prejudices that I may still hang onto?
Racial prejudices, class distinctions, political allegiances, whatever other marks, a personal status that can either fill us with pride or even with shame, Paul would say in Christ, those walls are torn down.
Well, I'm summing this up kind of briefly.
I don't want you to miss the core message of oneness.
Because that's gonna surface again and again in ways that I think we may find even more applicable to our own situation as we work our way through this book.
We're gonna conclude this morning by joining together in observing the Lord's table.
And I'm gonna ask the ushers if they would come and start serving you.
Communion is this tiny meal of remembrance and celebration.
It's a meal for those who have come to Jesus for rescue.
And I would just say, if that doesn't describe you yet, I mean, if you're here and you're really honest, you'd say, Tim, I'm still in the rut.
I'm still trying to figure out how to get myself out of the mess I'm in.
If you're not yet willing to call for help, I would let that tray go on by.
But maybe if that describes you and you'd say, you know what?
I do need help.
I need God's help.
Then I invite you to participate in this.
This can be your first act of saying, Lord, I need you.
I can't get myself out.
I need what you've done for me.
And trust me, there's no judgment in that.
You're surrounded by a whole bunch of us that found ourselves in those same ruts.
As I was thinking about sharing communion with us,
and my experience on that hillside.
Another image came to mind.
You may recall that one of my final ideas for saving myself was to crawl underneath the truck with that jack, because I thought that maybe I could lift myself out of the rut.
Now, fortunately for me, just this side of disaster, I recognized the idiocy of that plan.
Had I crawled under that truck,
I most likely would have been crushed.
It absolutely would have been my fault.
The whole thing was my fault.
And that final disaster would simply have been the unavoidable end of my own foolishness.
But that's where my metaphor about the tow truck on me on the hillside kind of breaks down because my rescuer, the tow truck driver, never had to put himself in my position.
He pulled up in his big truck,
He pulled his cable out to me from a nice safe distance.
He stood back at his truck and pulled a few levers and he pulled me out of the ride.
And yet the story we have of Jesus is that Jesus was not able to stay at a safe distance.
Now we can puzzle over some of the mysteries of the cross.
But the reality is that God, knowing all of the options,
recognized that the only one that would save us was for Jesus to take our place.
He had to crawl under the truck.
He suffered what I should have suffered, and it killed him.
On the night Jesus was betrayed, his disciples had no idea the hill that he was about to climb.
They thought it was just another Passover party like every other Passover, but Jesus knew they had come to this critical fork in the road.
And the path that he was choosing was going to lead up a very steep hill to a cross.
And knowing that, he did this.
He took bread and gave thanks and broke it and gave it to them saying, this is my body given for you.
Do this in remembrance of me.
In the same way after supper he took the cup saying, this cup is the new covenant in my blood which is poured out for you.
The bread and the cup, they are symbols.
They are reminders of what Jesus has done for us.
That he was the one who was willing to crawl under the truck.
that he was the one who was willing to be crushed so that we could be free.
And while we may not understand all the mysteries of his death for us, wrap our minds around the power of his resurrection, or the change his spirit has brought in our lives, all that together is this powerful proof that the sacrifice he made was not a futile attempt.
It was the start of a great rescue.
And so on that night, he asked his disciples to remember regularly what had been done to save them.
So just a moment, we're going to take the bread and then we're going to take the cup.
And I would invite you, as you do that, to offer prayer of thanks for the rescue we've been given in Christ.
Let's pray.
Oh Lord Jesus, I don't think that
Any silly story about a tow truck and a hillside can do justice to what you have done for us.
But Lord, thank you.
Thank you for the rescue.
Some of us can look back on our lives and we see deep ruts that you saved us out of.
Maybe for some of us, the rest didn't seem as deep, but had you not changed our course, we would have been stuck all the same.
Thank you for your great grace.
Thank you for that little phrase in Paul's letter, but God, your great love for us.
We now take this bread, we take this cup as a reminder of your body broken for us, your blood shed for us to rescue us, to give us freedom.
Thank you for this great gift.
We pray it in your name, amen.